Migrating from Self-Managed Node-RED to FlowFuse-Managed Node-RED (#2668)
FlowFuse/website: src/blog/2024/11/migrating-from-node-red-to-flowfuse.md

---
title: Migrating from Self-Managed Node-RED to FlowFuse-Managed Node-RED
subtitle: A Step-by-Step Guide to Transitioning Your Node-RED Flows to a Streamlined FlowFuse Environment
description: Discover how to migrate from a self-managed Node-RED setup to a FlowFuse-managed environment, including step-by-step instructions for instance creation, data backup, and snapshot deployment.
date: 2024-11-11
authors: ["sumit-shinde"]

> image:

Reviewer: TODO? No art request AFAIK?

keywords: node-red migration, node-red snapshot, node-red instance management, remote instance management, edge device management,  node-red backup, node-red to flowfuse migration, flowfuse static assets, node-red deployment, cloud-based node-red, node-red instance snapshot
tags:
   - flowfuse
   - flowfuse features
---

> In this article, you will learn how to migrate from a self-managed and self-hosted Node-RED setup to a FlowFuse-managed environment and how that flow works for edge devices and remote instances.

Reviewer 2: Mention here the benefit of doing so. Does it make it easier, more efficient, faster etc?

<!--more-->

> ## What is FlowFuse?

Reviewer 2: We don't need a title like this called out since its our blog. it can be part of the intro on why it helps to use FF to manage your NR.

- **Scalability**: As your IIoT environment grows, scaling your Node-RED infrastructure to handle increased demand becomes challenging. Managing multiple instances, especially in distributed systems, can lead to inconsistencies and difficulties in ensuring that all components are operating at optimal performance.

- **Remote Management**: For edge devices, managing Node-RED remotely can be tricky. You need a robust way to access, monitor, and update devices securely from a central location, especially as your network expands.

FlowFuse addresses all of these challenges by providing a fully managed, secure, and scalable environment for your Node-RED instances. With FlowFuse, you can focus on building your IIoT solutions while FlowFuse takes care of the infrastructure, updates, and scalability. This reduces the operational overhead and ensures your instances are always up-to-date and secure. For more information, refer to the article: [Transform Chaos into Control: Centralize Node-RED Management with FlowFuse](/blog/2024/10/managing-node-red-instances-in-centralize-platfrom/).

## Migrating from Node-RED to FlowFuse

> Before you start, make sure you have a FlowFuse Account created Next, consider how your Node-RED instance needs to be deployed. Decide whether it should run **on the device itself** or as a **remote instance**. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before you start, make sure you have a FlowFuse Account created. Next, consider how your Node-RED instance needs to be deployed. Decide whether it should run on the device itself or as a remote instance. 
```

> Before you start, make sure you have a FlowFuse Account created. Next, consider how your Node-RED instance needs to be deployed. Decide whether it should run on the device itself or as a remote instance. 

Reviewer: Are we migrating to FFC? Or does this guide also work with a self-hosted FF?

>  Decide whether it should run on the device itself or as a remote instance. 

What does that line mean?

> Running Node-RED on the device is ideal when you need direct access to hardware components, such as reading sensors or controlling actuators. This setup allows for immediate data processing and control, which is crucial for applications requiring real-time responses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running Node-RED on an edge device is ideal when you need direct access to hardware components, such as reading sensors or controlling actuators. This setup allows for immediate data processing and control, which is crucial for applications requiring low latency responses.
```

> On the other hand, if your use case involves monitoring or collecting metrics—such as through MQTT—without needing direct hardware interaction, a **remote instance** may be more suitable. This option allows you to centralize data collection and processing, making it easier to manage and analyze data from multiple devices.

Reviewer: @sumitshinde-84 can we move away from "Remote instance" in favour of the "Edge" keyword?

Once you have migrated all your assets, you will be able to access them in the instance created in the FlowFuse cloud. Just ensure that after deploying the snapshot, the path set in the flow matches the static assets migrated to the FlowFuse instance.

### Deploying Snapshot for the Remote/Device instance

Once the System-level environment variables are set, you are good to deploy that captured snapshot in the Device or the Remote instance.

1. Navigate to the remote instance for which you created the snapshot, either to migrate your current Node-RED setup or to prepare it for later deployment on a device.
2. Switch to the "Snapshots" tab at the top to locate the snapshot you created from the list.
3. On the right side of the snapshot, click the three-dot icon:

   - If you are migrating to the remote instance, select **"Restore Snapshot."**
   - If you are migrating to a Device Instance, select **"Set as Device Target."**

Setting a device target will ensure that the snapshot will be deployed on all of the devices assigned to this instance.

## Conclusion

> Migrating your Node-RED instance to FlowFuse centralizes management and simplifies deployment. Once migrated, FlowFuse takes care of the infrastructure, security, and scalability, making the process much easier. This allows you to focus on building solutions without worrying about the complexities of self-hosting. Whether you're working with edge devices or remote instances, this migration streamlines the management of your IIoT workflows, improving efficiency and scalability.

Reviewer 2: you can move this section to the top as part of the intro instead.

- **Scalability**: As your IIoT environment grows, scaling your Node-RED infrastructure to handle increased workloads can be challenging. Managing multiple distributed instances often leads to inconsistencies and difficulties in maintaining optimal performance across your entire system.

- **Edge Device Management**: Managing Node-RED instances on edge devices introduces additional complexity. Remote access, secure monitoring, and seamless updates become more difficult as your network expands, especially when dealing with a large number of edge devices.

FlowFuse addresses these challenges by providing a fully managed, secure, and scalable environment for your Node-RED instances. With FlowFuse, you can focus on building and deploying your IIoT solutions, while FlowFuse handles the infrastructure, updates, and scalability. This reduces operational overhead and ensures your instances remain up-to-date and secure.

For more information, read the article: [Transform Chaos into Control: Centralize Node-RED Management with FlowFuse](/blog/2024/10/managing-node-red-instances-in-centralize-platfrom/).

## Migrating from Node-RED to FlowFuse

> Before you start, make sure you have a FlowFuse Account created. Next, consider how your Node-RED instance needs to be deployed. Decide whether it should run on the edge device or as a cloud instance. 

Author: Already added !

1. Go to the your FlowFuse Cloud/Device instance.
2. Open the Settings tab by clicking the "Settings" option at the top of the page, then select the Environment tab.
3. Add the environment variables one by one by clicking the "+ Add" button in the bottom-left corner.
4. After adding all the environment variables, click "Save."

For more information refer to [Using Environment Variables in Node-RED](/blog/2023/01/environment-variables-in-node-red/)

#### Migrating Static Assets to FlowFuse Static Assets

When working with dashboards or files required in your Node-RED project, these files are typically stored locally and are always available, even if you restart or modify the flows. However, when migrating from Node-RED to a FlowFuse cloud environment, you'll need to manually migrate these files to the cloud-based Node-RED instances. To make this process easier, FlowFuse offers a static assets service feature at the instance level.

Here’s how you can migrate your assets:

1. Locate your static assets in your local system that are used in your Self-managed Node-RED instance from the snapshot we have taken.

> 2. Upload them one by one through the Instance "Static Assets" tab. For more information, refer to the [Static Asset Service documentation]( /docs/user/static-asset-service/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Upload them one by one through the Instance "Static Assets" tab. For more information, refer to the [Static Asset Service documentation](/docs/user/static-asset-service/).
```
